README.md, before:

# Spark OSM PBF datasource

[OSM PBF format](https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/PBF_Format) spark datasource.

## Rationale

Opestreetmap is a literally planet scale database storing features found on a Earth surfaces. Commonly used OSM processing software
either uses single host processing or converts and stores OSM data to some database engine and uses it as a source of truth for distributed
processing. With Spark abilities to automatically distribute huge dataset over hundreds of nodes and process more data, that a
single node could fit, it sounds pretty logical to implement native Spark OSM PBF data source  
## Download

### Maven 
        
        incomplete
        
### Gradle

        incomplete
        
### SBT 
                        
        incomplete
        
### Github release

        incomplete
        
## Usage                
        
OSM PBF data source uses [parallel OSM PBF parser](https://github.com/akashihi/parallelpbf) internally, therefore it needs to provide
it with a input stream. The simplest way to do that while keeping it compatible with most of file sources is to add file
to a spark context first:

    val spark = SparkSession
      .builder()
      .appName("OsmReader")
      .config("spark.master", "local[24]")
      .getOrCreate()

    spark.sparkContext.addFile("/osm/data/extract-cesko-brno.osm.pbf")

The next thing do to is actually load the file. Please keep in mind, that you should specify just a file name as 
the `load` parameter, not a full path.     
    
    val osm = spark.read.option("partitions", 256).format("akashihi.osm.spark.OsmSource").load("extract-cesko-brno.osm.pbf").drop("INFO").persist(StorageLevel.MEMORY_AND_DISK)
    
There are two options for the reader:

* `partitions` - Number of partitions to split OSM PBF file. Pay attentions, that full planet file is about 1.2TB of uncompressed data, so plan
your partitioning accordingly.
* `thread` - Number of threads to use by [parallel OSM PBF parser](https://github.com/akashihi/parallelpbf). Keep it
`1` for a local deployments or set to number of cores per worker node.

## Schema

Due to Spark processing paradigm, all types of the OSM entities are mapped to the same dataframe of the following structure:

    StructField("ID", LongType, nullable = false),
    StructField("TAG", MapType(StringType, StringType, valueContainsNull = false), nullable = false),
    StructField("INFO", StructType(    StructField("UID", IntegerType, nullable = true),
                                       StructField("USERNAME", StringType, nullable = true),
                                       StructField("VERSION", IntegerType, nullable = true),
                                       StructField("TIMESTAMP", LongType, nullable = true),
                                       StructField("CHANGESET", LongType, nullable = true),
                                       StructField("VISIBLE", BooleanType, nullable = false)
                                        ), nullable = true),
    StructField("LAT", DoubleType, nullable = true),
    StructField("LON", DoubleType, nullable = true),
    StructField("WAY", ArrayType(LongType, containsNull = false), nullable = true),
    StructField("RELATION", ArrayType(StructType(    StructField("ID", LongType, nullable = false),
                                                     StructField("ROLE", StringType, nullable = true),
                                                     StructField("TYPE", IntegerType, nullable = false)
                                                 ), containsNull = false), nullable = true)

OSM nodes will have `LAT` and `LON` fields set and `WAY` and `RELATION` fields will be null.
OSM nodes will have `WAY` fields set and `LAT`/`LON` and `RELATION` fields will be null.
OSM relations will have `RELATION` fields set and `LAT`/`LON` and `WAYS` fields will be null.

Reader supports column pruning during read, so dropped columnts will not be loaded from the OSM PBF file. Even more,
if both `LAT` and `LON` colmns will be dropped, no node processing will be started at all. Same applies for
`WAY` and `RELATION` columnn.

### Warning on order instability

OSM PBF file can be sorted and stored in a ordered way. Unfortunately, due to parallel nature of the Spark, that 
ordering will be broken during parsing and several consequent dataframe loads may return data in a different order for 
each run. In case order is important for you, you can dataframe sort after loading. 
                          |

## Versioning

We use [SemVer](http://semver.org/) for versioning. For the versions available, see the [tags on this repository](https://github.com/akashihi/spark-osm-reader/tags). 

## Authors

* **Denis Chaplygin** - *Initial work* - [akashihi](https://github.com/akashihi)

## License

This project is licensed under the GPLv3 License - see the LICENSE file for details.

Commit message:

Added "TYPE" field to the reader output

README.md, after:

# Spark OSM PBF datasource

[OSM PBF format](https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/PBF_Format) spark datasource.

## Rationale

Opestreetmap is a literally planet scale database storing features found on a Earth surfaces. Commonly used OSM processing software
either uses single host processing or converts and stores OSM data to some database engine and uses it as a source of truth for distributed
processing. With Spark abilities to automatically distribute huge dataset over hundreds of nodes and process more data, that a
single node could fit, it sounds pretty logical to implement native Spark OSM PBF data source  
## Download

### Maven 
        
        incomplete
        
### Gradle

        incomplete
        
### SBT 
                        
        incomplete
        
### Github release

        incomplete
        
## Usage                
        
OSM PBF data source uses [parallel OSM PBF parser](https://github.com/akashihi/parallelpbf) internally, therefore it needs to provide
it with a input stream. The simplest way to do that while keeping it compatible with most of file sources is to add file
to a spark context first:

    val spark = SparkSession
      .builder()
      .appName("OsmReader")
      .config("spark.master", "local[24]")
      .getOrCreate()

    spark.sparkContext.addFile("/osm/data/extract-cesko-brno.osm.pbf")

The next thing do to is actually load the file. Please keep in mind, that you should specify just a file name as 
the `load` parameter, not a full path.     
    
    val osm = spark.read.option("partitions", 256).format("akashihi.osm.spark.OsmSource").load("extract-cesko-brno.osm.pbf").drop("INFO").persist(StorageLevel.MEMORY_AND_DISK)
    
There are two options for the reader:

* `partitions` - Number of partitions to split OSM PBF file. Pay attentions, that full planet file is about 1.2TB of uncompressed data, so plan
your partitioning accordingly.
* `thread` - Number of threads to use by [parallel OSM PBF parser](https://github.com/akashihi/parallelpbf). Keep it
`1` for a local deployments or set to number of cores per worker node.

## Schema

Due to Spark processing paradigm, all types of the OSM entities are mapped to the same dataframe of the following structure:

    StructField("ID", LongType, nullable = false),
    StructField("TAG", MapType(StringType, StringType, valueContainsNull = false), nullable = false),
    StructField("INFO", StructType(    StructField("UID", IntegerType, nullable = true),
                                       StructField("USERNAME", StringType, nullable = true),
                                       StructField("VERSION", IntegerType, nullable = true),
                                       StructField("TIMESTAMP", LongType, nullable = true),
                                       StructField("CHANGESET", LongType, nullable = true),
                                       StructField("VISIBLE", BooleanType, nullable = false)
                                        ), nullable = true),
    StructField("TYPE", IntegerType, nullable = false),
    StructField("LAT", DoubleType, nullable = true),
    StructField("LON", DoubleType, nullable = true),
    StructField("WAY", ArrayType(LongType, containsNull = false), nullable = true),
    StructField("RELATION", ArrayType(StructType(    StructField("ID", LongType, nullable = false),
                                                     StructField("ROLE", StringType, nullable = true),
                                                     StructField("TYPE", IntegerType, nullable = false)
                                                 ), containsNull = false), nullable = true)

OSM nodes will have `LAT` and `LON` fields set and `WAY` and `RELATION` fields will be null.
OSM nodes will have `WAY` fields set and `LAT`/`LON` and `RELATION` fields will be null.
OSM relations will have `RELATION` fields set and `LAT`/`LON` and `WAYS` fields will be null.

`TYPE` field in both `RELATION` structure and in dataframe structure indicates type of the OSM entity. It is an
integer field with following values:

* 0 - Item is a OSM Node entity
* 1 - Item is a OSM Way entity
* 2 - Item is a OSM Relation entity

Reader supports column pruning during read, so dropped columnts will not be loaded from the OSM PBF file. Even more,
if both `LAT` and `LON` columns will be dropped, no node processing will be started at all. Same applies for
`WAY` and `RELATION` columnn.

### Warning on order instability

OSM PBF file can be sorted and stored in a ordered way. Unfortunately, due to parallel nature of the Spark, that 
ordering will be broken during parsing and several consequent dataframe loads may return data in a different order for 
each run. In case order is important for you, you can dataframe sort after loading. 
                          |

## Versioning

We use [SemVer](http://semver.org/) for versioning. For the versions available, see the [tags on this repository](https://github.com/akashihi/spark-osm-reader/tags). 

## Authors

* **Denis Chaplygin** - *Initial work* - [akashihi](https://github.com/akashihi)

## License

This project is licensed under the GPLv3 License - see the LICENSE file for details.
